https://doi.org/10.1177/23969873221099736
European Stroke Journal
2022, Vol. 7(3) V
© European Stroke Organisation 2022
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/23969873221099736
journals.sagepub.com/home/eso
European Stroke Organisation (ESO) 
guidelines on management of unruptured 
intracranial aneurysms
Nima Etminan1
, Diana Aguiar de Sousa2,3
, Cindy Tiseo4, 
Romain Bourcier5, Hubert Desal5, Anttii Lindgren6,7,8
,  
Timo Koivisto7,8, David Netuka9, Simone Peschillo10,11,  
Sabrina Lémeret12
, Avtar Lal12, Mervyn DI Vergouwen13  
and Gabriel JE Rinkel1,13
Abstract
Unruptured intracranial aneurysms (UIA) occur in around 3% of the population. Important management questions concern 
if and how to perform preventive UIA occlusion; if, how and when to perform follow up imaging and non-interventional 
means to reduce the risk of rupture. Using the Standard Operational Procedure of ESO we prepared guidelines according 
to GRADE methodology. Since no completed randomised trials exist, we used interim analyses of trials, and meta-analyses 
of observational and case-control studies to provide recommendations to guide UIA management. All recommendations 
were based on very low evidence. We suggest preventive occlusion if the estimated 5-year rupture risk exceeds the risk 
of preventive treatment. In general, we cannot recommend endovascular over microsurgical treatment, but suggest flow 
diverting stents as option only when there are no other low-risk options for UIA repair. To detect UIA recurrence we 
suggest radiological follow up after occlusion. In patients who are initially observed, we suggest radiological monitoring to 
detect future UIA growth, smoking cessation, treatment of hypertension, but not treatment with statins or acetylsalicylic acid 
with the indication to reduce the risk of aneurysm rupture. Additionally, we formulated 15 expert-consensus statements. 
All experts suggest to assess UIA patients within a multidisciplinary setting (neurosurgery, neuroradiology and neurology) at 
centres consulting >100 UIA patients per year, to use a shared decision-making process based on the team recommendation 
and patient preferences, and to repair UIA only in centres performing the proposed treatment in >30 patients with (ruptured 
or unruptured) aneurysms per year per neurosurgeon or neurointerventionalist. These UIA guidelines provide contemporary 
recommendations and consensus statement on important aspects of UIA management until more robust data come available.
Keywords
Unruptured intracranial aneurysms, risk of rupture, coiling, clipping, endovascular repair, risk factors, medical 
management, aneurysm growth, grading of recommendations, assessment, management, guidelines
The full version of this guideline appears online. All guidelines can be found at https://journals.sagepub.com/topic/collections-eso/eso-1-guidelines/esoa 
Date received: 9 April 2022; accepted: 25 April 2022
 1Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany
 2Stroke Centre, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Central, Lisbon, Portugal
 3CEEM and Institute of Anatomy, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
 4Department of Neurology and Stroke Unit, SS Filippo e Nicola Hospital, Avezzano, Italy
 5Department of Diagnostic and Therapeutic Neuroradiology, University Hospital of Nantes, INSERM, CNRS, Université de Nantes, l’institut du 
thorax, France
 6Department of Clinical Radiology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland
 7Department of Neurosurgery, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland
 8Institute of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland
 9Department of Neurosurgery and Neurooncology, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Praha, Czech Republic
10Department of Surgical Medical Sciences and Advanced Technologies ‘G.F. Ingrassia’ - Endovascular Neurosurgery, University of Catania, Catania, Italy
11Endovascular Neurosurgery, Pia Fondazione Cardinale Giovanni Panico Hospital, Tricase, LE, Italy
12European Stroke Organisation, Basel, Switzerland
13Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, UMC Utrecht Brain Center, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands
Corresponding author:
Nima Etminan, Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer 
Ufer 1-3, Mannheim, 68165, Germany. 
Email: nima.etminan@umm.de
0010.1177/23969873221099736European Stroke JournalEtminan et al.
research-article2022
Guideline

